"You've been hacked." - a phrase so terrifying that it can only be trumped by "It's cancer" and "I want you to meet my parents".  Each year the email addresses, passwords, credit cards and other personal information of millions of people end up in the hands of hackers.  The most common cause - SQL Injection.

	# Unless this joke is your style, the direct-to-audience storytime connections have been working better for you. What is it about being hacked that scares people? Or, did it just happen to someone in the world (like every x seconds)? Or? The reveal - SQL injection - means little to us yet. Do you want to just tell us that you're going to talk about the "most common cause"? If so, what's the most exciting/intriguing way to do it? "And 62.75% of the time, what screws you over is the most devious, simplest little hack around, oldest trick in the book."

[INTRO]

/ Welcome to CompChomp...the only show on the internet where doing more than one thing at a time is bad....very bad.

/ Welcome to CompChomp...the only show on the internet where a fear of needles and bad code intersect.

	# I didn't get the first; the second almost got my attention.
	# "Where digital trypanophobia is a thing! Look it up. Cuz we did."

Structured Query Language (SQL to its friends) is a language used to talk to databases. 

	# The above might be too technical too fast. What follows next could be told as a story instead. Like you're getting the bros together and cranking out the next app (restaurantfinder for dragonlovers?). Build snazzy page, interface, whatever... then want people login or whatever triggers you to realize you need to store their info. You do that in a db. Which is a vault.... After that you're just reformatting and cutting the existing sentences below to fit within the story!

Think of a database as a bank vault that can be filled with information. Any kind of information.  From the mundane, 'sexycoder5' has logged in 47 times, to the embarrassing, the fact that my user name is 'sexycoder5' , to the valuable - like my social security number - 093....haha...you didn't think I'd give it away that easy did you?

/ SQL is the bank manager deciding what information enters and leaves that bank vault.
/ SQL is the bank teller responsible for withdrawing and depositing all of the information in that vault.

[Not sure if either metaphore is correct...there's almost something there though...probably just needs to be tweaked a bit].

And that setup works great...as long as your database will never be touched by an untrusted source....which is not how most web applications work.  We need to get data from our users into our application.  So we put up forms asking for name, email address and password.  There are fields for telling us what you're searching for.  We add check boxes and radio buttons and encourage people to leave a comment below.  And you definitely want strangers to use your app because it's not going to be successful if your mom is the only one using it.  Especially if she gives it a 1-star rating.  "You haven't called in 3 days." is not legitimate feedback, Mom!

	# Personalize that shady mcshadester a bit more. He's a character now.

So you take that information the strangers put into your forms and you send it to your database. And things are usually fine because most people just want your program to work as expected. But, one day, a shady mcshadester like this signs into your app (which of course is like Uber for Yelp or AirBnB for dinner or whatever) and he searches for the following restaurant:

'); DELETE FROM Restaurants --

Which turns into the following SQL query:

SELECT "restaurant".* FROM "restaurants" WHERE (name LIKE '%'); DELETE FROM Restaurants -- %’)

And, suddenly, your entire restaurant table is gone....not your table at the restaurant...your restaurant table in your database.  Though you should probably cancel those reservations because you're going to be spending the rest of the night restoring your database from backups.

	# Story 1 is over. Now you're transitioning us from seeing the sequence of events that everyone goes through in building their apps to understanding the real-world consequences. Can you do this in a way that we care about more? "But surely these big businesses with their shiny logos and trusted brands that make me scroll through these thousand page contracts know about this. You'd think so, but..."

This nasty little trick is known as SQL injection.  It's when someone closes out a legitimate transaction with your database then immediately sneaks more SQL commands in there so they can interact with your database in a way you didn't intend.  And it happens all the time!

	# Two options here. 1: spend time giving us one solid example we can really feel. 2: keep this one-two-three punch list but tighten it up so it's both humorous and oh so bad that this is going on. Stripping names, brand identity and details totally takes the teeth out of these examples, but I get the reluctance. Can you be bold in other ways that keep our interest or at least bring us back to meet you where we know what you know and care like you care? (Do you care about these hacks? Why???)

June 2011, a major entertainment conglomerate lost the data of over 1,000,000 users, including passwords that were reportedly stored in plain text.  Ouch!

October of 2012, SQL injection is used to steal the personal records of thousands of students from 53 top universities around the world.  Student info is highly sought after because they usually have great credit records and they don't watch their credit scores.  I guess that's one positive side effect of crushing student debt...by the time you graduate, no one wants to steal your identity.

In August 2014, hackers in Russian stole 1.2 billion username and password combinations and 500,000 email addresses from 400,000 sites.  Not just small sites made by your cousin's best friend's uncle's kid who sort of knows how to code.  This hack included sites built by Fortune 500 companies.

More recently in November 2015, an electronic toy company was hacked and the personal data of 5 million parents and 200,000 kids was taken.

So, how do we put an end to this? 

	# We're already thinking this. Especially if you hit us with the real-world lashes, we're left with a sting and wide open for something more frustratedly direct - "What's sad is none of this even needed to happen!" or "The real tragedy here is how easy this is to fix/avoid." Then back to the story. Not user-provided data directly to your database, but when user X signs up make sure you don't store user X's stuff right in the vault. Clean it up first.

Make sure that user-provided data is never sent directly to your database.  It should always be sanitized first so none of the characters that have special meaning to SQL databases are treated as anything other than a string.

You should also use prepared statements.  This is where you send the SQL query to the database with placeholders where you're going to add user information later.  Then, when the statement comes through with the user's input, anything in place of a placeholder can only be treated as a string.  Captain Hacksalot can stuff it full of all the SQL he wants and your data is still safe.

	# Shady McShadester it was, no? Stay with your story! Unless there are two characters after me now. Wait... mebbe... now I'm REALLY scared!!!

Small price to pay to keep your app out of the news for all the wrong reasons.

	# Possibly can stay in character and end this within the story. The last thing we want is for you to see your twitter blow up when Dragonsterauntchamacallit gets hacked and we found out that an anonymous IP address in Russia is threatening to leak your million names, addresses and credit cards. Sanitize that.

CHOMP!





=== OLD SCRIPT ===
Growing up - the internet was my constant companion.  When I was really young, I would dial directly into my favorite Bulletin Board Systems (BBS) to play games and chat. As I got older, things got easier and I used companies like Prodigy, CompuServe and AOL to get online. As I was finishing up high school, the old slow dial up internet access transitioned into broadband access and the rest was history.  But something else was happening around this time...something that seemed so innocent and yet it would prove to be one of the greatest vulnerabilities the internet had ever seen.  What was it?  Why, the transition to SQL databases.  Duhn...duhn...duhn.....

[INTRO]

Welcome to CompChomp...the only show on the internet where doing more than one thing at a time is bad....very bad.

In the late 90's, developers of web applications were starting to transition from Access databases to SQL databases.  In 1998, Jeff Forristal, a hacker known as Rainforest Puppy (Hey Josh!  I want a cool hacker name!), discovered that SQL databases allowed batch commands.  You could open up the connection to the database once then send multiple commands through.  NBD because multitasking is good, right?  However, when you have input coming from outside users heading straight into your database...well, things get a little dicy.  

A shady character...like this one....could user your innocent little web form to gain access to parts of your database you didn't want them to have by piggy backing their own SQL requests onto your intended request....like so.

You kindly provide your users with the ability to search for a restaurant even when they only know part of the name:

SELECT "restaurant".* FROM "restaurants" WHERE ("name LIKE '%user_input%');

And shady mcshadester searches for the following restaurant (which doesn't sound so great to me):

'); DELETE FROM Restaurants --

Which gives us the following SQL query:

SELECT "restaurant".* FROM "restaurants" WHERE (name LIKE '%'); DELETE FROM Restaurants -- %’)

And, suddenly, your entire restaurant table is gone....not your table at the restaurant...your restaurant table in your database.  Though you should probably cancel those reservations because you're going to be spending the rest of the night restoring your database from backups.

This nasty little trick is known as SQL injection.  It's when someone closes out a legitimate transaction with your database then immediately sneaks more SQL commands in there so they can interact with your database in a way you didn't intend.

SQL injection has been on people's radar for at least 18 years and yet it regularly ranks at the top of the Open Web Application Security Project's 10 most critical web application security risks....and that is not a top 10 list you want to be on.  If you do a quick scan of recent news, you'll get plenty of examples of SQL injection in action:

June 2011, a major entertainment conglomerate lost the data of over 1,000,000 users, including passwords that were reportedly stored in plain text.  Ouch!

October of 2012, SQL injection is used to steal the personal records of thousands of students from 53 top universities around the world.  Student info is highly sought after because they usually have great credit records and they don't watch their credit scores.  I guess that's one positive side effect of crushing student debt...by the time you graduate, no one wants to steal your identity.

In August 2014, hackers in Russian stole 1.2 billion username and password combinations and 500,000 email addresses from 400,000 sites.  Not just small sites made by your cousin's best friend's uncle's kid who sort of knows how to code.  This hack included sites built by Fortune 500 companies.

More recently in November 2015, an electronic toy company was hacked and the personal data of 5 million parents and 200,000 kids was taken.

So what's the deal, is there some elite Hacker Havard out there teaching the world's greatest hackers how to sneak unwanted SQL commands into our databases like sneaky little code ninja?

In a word....nope.

SQL injection is common for two reasons.

The first is that it's easy to automate.  There are scripts you can buy that will just bounce around the internet testing web forms and URLs to see which ones are vulnerable.  Once a site is found, the same basic techniques can be used to get access to your data.  Troy Hunt (a web security expert and founder of haveibeenpwned.com) actually has a video showing him teaching his then 3-year-old to do a SQLi attack using one of the most popular programs.  This thing has a gui and everything...you don't even have to know how to use the command line!

The second is that it keeps working.  Hackers continue to use it because even though we've known about it for 18 years, they're still getting gigs and gigs worth of valuable personal data from our web apps.

So, how do we put an end to this?  

If you're a programmer, you can make sure that user-provided data is never sent directly to your database.  It should always be sanitized first so none of the characters that have special meaning to SQL databases are treated as anything other than a string.  If your setup allows for it, you can also use parameterized queries.  This allows the statement to be sent to the database with placeholders for the user data so the database can determine what type of functions it will need to run.  Then, when the statement comes back with the data supplied by the user, if the user's input changes the functions that need to run, the database will throw an error and won't make the changes.

Is there anything you can do if you're not a programmer?  As lame as this might sound, one of the best defenses is to have a solid password (no more using password123) and to use different passwords for each site.  This way, if one site you're on is hacked, those shady hackers won't immediately have access to all of your other sites as well.  It won't really stop SQL injection but it will keep you from losing everything just because the dog walking app you used once didn't protect your data.

CHOMP!